# Senior Portfolio
Senior Portfolio for Westminster College

### [Asteroids](https://github.com/alexrybrown/senior-portfolio/tree/master/asteroids)

   This project was created for the current CMPT 202 class running at Westminster College. During my Undergraduate Teaching class I was asked to help redesign the current course projects and create projects that would help the students see where they might use the data structures being taught. One of these projects was an implementation of the game Asteroids. I chose this project because I thought it would help demonstrate to myself that I truly understood the concepts that I had learned in 202 and also allowed me to work for the first time on a project that was larger than most I had written. This was also important for me to code because I thought it would give the students an interesting example of where Array Lists are used in interesting and engaging ways. It also allowed them to visually and physically interact with their program so they could use what they created. 
   
   After completing this program I felt like I had a much better understanding of how objects fit together and interact with one another. With this code I had to develop my problem solving skills and select appropriate data structures to house the information that the program needed. Since we are keeping track of many items on the screen as well as adding and removing items dynamically from the screen, Array Lists made the most sense for me to use. By using these I was easily able to add and remove items using pop and add methods. An example of this is when a bullet collides with an asteroid. After the collision has been detected both needed to be removed from their respective ArrayList so that they are not drawn on the next call to paint.
   
### [Chat Server](https://github.com/alexrybrown/senior-portfolio/tree/master/java-chat-server)

  I created and worked on this project while in Computer Networks. Through the course of the class the everyone in the class was told that they would be working on a project together towards the end. This project consisted of creating a specification the whole class needed to agree upon and follow. Once this specification was created we were asked to either individually or in pairs design this project so that the specifications were met. This was the first project I coded in my programming career that felt like it had a larger scope and required understanding how all of the pieces fit together before writing any code. I was also able to work with a partner on this project and it allowed for interesting discussion and debate about what might be the best way to tackle a given problem within the project.
  
  One major thing this project did is allowed me to see how a computer works as a whole. This project required threading for server communication with clients. Using threads required an understanding of both semaphores and mutex locks and when to use either of those two. This opened up the idea of putting threads to sleep which allows the CPU to only briefly come back to that piece of program and check to see if it needs to be woken up. If not it just passes over it and continues executing other threads created by the program. This also allowed me to work more on my problem solving skills and think with my partner about different solutions when they were not so easy to find. We also had to think about what type of data structures to use especially making sure they were thread safe data structures and that the data needed by a thread was always in a correct and up to date state.
  
### [Programming Language Interpretter](https://github.com/alexrybrown/senior-portfolio/tree/master/little-scheme)

  During the course of the Programming Languages course I took I was able to create an interpreter that parsed and interpreted Scheme code using Scala. I worked on this code with a couple other partners and it showed me how interesting and different a functional language is and what tools it has at its disposal as compared to a object-oriented language. During the course of this project we iterated through our code many times to constantly add new functionality and features to our interpreter and make it more robust as this was done. This allowed for us to slowly build the project from the ground up and not get too worried with the final project before we had laid a foundation.
  
  With this code we were able to iteratively design, write, and test the program. This allowed us to make changes to the project and know that we had tests there to make sure that whatever changes we had made did not disturb the already working and running code. This also allowed me to create something in a language and that I had never seen before. Not only was I able to do that but also I was able to look closer into functional programming and the benefits and drawbacks of coding in one of those types of languages. One of the benefits I was able to see about Scala is that it is a functional language but it is also built on top of the JVM so you are also able to mix in Java with the functional structure and make use of some very interesting and useful styles of coding. We also had to rethink what data structures to use as recursive programming was the only way to traverse most things in Scala. This meant that we had to look at what data structures the language had for us and see how they differed from the similar data structures and schema that we already knew.
  
### [Software Engineering Math App](https://github.com/alexrybrown/senior-portfolio/tree/master/math-app)

  Software engineering was a course based around the development of a project through the whole course of the semester and using techniques like agile development to be flexible and able to create a project of large scale while working in a team of four individuals. This project taught me much about working with others and creating reasonable expectations when setting goals for what needs to be accomplished. It also allowed me to increase my knowledge in Android development and see how a whole tech stack works together to make a cohesive and functioning app. Through the semester I was able to work on my time estimates and get a better understanding of how to judge what needs to go into a given task and how to best estimate how long that task will take to complete.
  
  This project let me traverse the whole tech stack and see how the phone interacts with its system software and how it also interacts with a server over the network. It gave me a better understanding of how these pieces fit together and how to properly utilize them. With any large project the first thing you need to be able to do is have a good idea of what you want to build and what you might use to build it. This thought process gave me a better idea of how software is developed and how to design, write, and test a large scale software project. Since I was working with three other people on this project it also allowed me to work more on my communication skills and stretched me to come up with better ways to communicate ideas with my team and make sure we were all on the same page. Of course with any big project comes the challenge of figuring out how best to store and move the data you need around. This project had many opportunities to explore this problem and allowed for the use of structures like Hash Maps and Array Lists.
  
### [Senior Capstone Project](https://github.com/alexrybrown/senior-portfolio/tree/master/senior-project)

  When choosing what I was going to do for my capstone project a flipped between a few ideas but ended on something that allowed me to grow as a developer and work with something that was a little less familiar for me. My capstone project consisted of an Android app that would allow a user to track their goals and break large goals down into smaller goals so that they would be easier to take on and less anxiety or fear inducing. I decided when I started this project that I wanted to work with a platform that I had not worked with before. This allowed me to expand my knowledge and learn a new way of coding the same problem that most software projects have. In the end I was able to create an app that talked to a web service and provided a complete set of features as well as an app that was visually pleasing to look at and traverse through.
  
  This project better allowed me to see how the whole system of the computer works together and transports data locally to somewhere else across the network. It showed me how Android executed its software and what tools it has to allow for easier execution. I was able to develop software that used two separate programming languages, Java and Python, and see how they were able to connect and communicate over a network and share data by making use of JSON. I was able to increase my knowledge of Django and better understand how the framework fits together. I created a large project that required a lot of planning on how to put it together and how best all the pieces might communicate and interact. I examined each small problem and discerned what data structure might be useful and what the pros and cons of using that data structure might be. Overall I was able to work on a project that allowed me to express what I had learned in my college career at Westminster and best demonstrate what I was taught and what I was able to build.
